Nushirvan, Sháh of Iran is known for his righteous rule and fair treatment of his
subjects. He graciously welcomes the envoy of the Indian Rája, who arrives with a thousand
camels and gifts. Nushirvan and his courtiers are well pleased with the presentation of the
horses and the gifts are taken to the royal treasury.The Rája
of Hind sent his envoy to Nurshirvan with the most important gift of them all:
the game of CHESS, challenging the Iranians to figure out the name of each piece
and the nature of the game. If they fail to figure it out the Sháh
will have to pay a tribute unto the Rája, “since knowledge is of all famed
things the best.” If they do figure it out, the Rája will then have to send full
tribute to the Sháh’s court with all good will. Nushirvan is seated on a red
carpet with intricate white designs. On his head sits a red royal headpiece covered in
white, gold, and red gems. He is cloaked in a deep blue robe that is
secured by a gold wrap around his waist. Nushirvan stands out in this image as
someone special like an eagle amidst crows. The men and chiefs all examine the chessboard,
trying every device and playing it with one another in all possible ways. Yet none
can figure it out. UNTIL Buzurjmihr finds Nushirvan troubled. He makes a promise to Nushirvan,
“O great king, I will discover all this goodly game, employing wisdom as my guide therein”
And so he did in one day and night. Nushirvan happily called upon all people,
including the envoy to watch the game finally be played. Two women are outside peering
over the balcony into the room filled with men as if a mother is patiently
overlooking the life of her children while the game is being played. Tension filled the room
until the game was successfully complete. The whole assembly was in awe. The Indian envoy
was alone among the Iranians as if underscoring his defeat in solving the game.